---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogLayout.astro
title: "Stan Twitter Community DIscourse Ethnography Project"
description: "This was a project I did in my college ENGL-1010 course."
category: "essay"
imgUrl: "/images/ai_tts.webp"
Date: 2023-10-19 00:00
---

This was an essay I wrote for my first English course in college, ENGL-1010. I've shared it around with some friends and we all thought it was pretty good (and pretty funny lol). I've decided to go ahead and publish it on mmatt.net and share it to the world! Enjoy & have a good laugh!

I will say however, some of the conclusions I came to, while somewhat true, of course doesn't represent all of Stan Twitter as a whole.

---

**To: \[REDACTED\]**

**From:** Matt Morris

**Subject:** Community Discourse Ethnography

**Date: 10/19/2023**

**Research Report**

---

# **Community**

My chosen discourse community is Stan Twitter. Stan Twitter is a large
group of music fans who use Twitter to promote their favorite artist.
Stan Twitter consists of lots of sub-groups that form around specific
genres of music and individual artists. Stan Twitter is a mostly
comprised of teenagers and young adults, regardless of gender however
most identify as LGBT+. Their main goal with using Twitter as a part of
the Stan Twitter group is to promote their favorite artist.

**Key Terms used by Stan Twitter**

- **Stan** -- Someone that may be extremely dedicated to their
  favorite artist. This term originates from the song "Stan" by
  Eminem, in which the song tells a story about someone claiming
  to be Eminem's biggest fan to the point of pushing himself to
  self-destruction.

- **\[artist or genre\]twt** -- An artist or genre's Twitter group.
  For example: "alttwt" for Alternative Pop Stan Twitter.

- **Fancam** -- This is a fan made video usually comprising of
  multiple pictures or videos of their favorite artist. Sometimes
  posted underneath an unrelated post to gain views on the video.

- **Locals** -- The general population and are the exact opposite type
  of people from stans.

- **Pop Base and Pop Crave** -- Pop Base and Pop Crave are both
  general pop culture media accounts that play a large role in Stan
  Twitter. Stans will always be in the comments of their tweets, to
  either praise or shame the person in question being reported on.

- **Payola** -- Defined officially as, "the practice of bribing
  someone to use their influence or position to promote a particular
  product or interest." Also described in the music industry as the
  illegal practice of paying a radio station to play a song without
  disclosing the payment. This is usually used when an artist, that a
  stan may have a bias against, is on the top of the Billboard charts.

- **Ratio** -- A comment getting more likes than the post it was made
  under, referring to the ratio of likes between the two posts.

- **Cancelled** -- Used when a celebrity or influencer does something
  controversial and not deemed supportable anymore.

- **oomf** -- Acronym for "one of my followers".

- **Mutual** -- Someone that you follow that also follows you back.

- **Name Search** -- The action of searching your own name on Twitter
  to see how people are talking about you.

- **Doxxing** -- Doxxing is the act of revealing private information,
  such as someone's address, phone number, or legal name to the
  public.

# **Interview**

My interviewee was Stan Twitter user from Australia, Shelly. She has
been involved in Stan Twitter for around one year. I asked Shelly about
her background in Stan Twitter, the objectives of Stan Twitter, and how
artists interact with Stan Twitter. I conducted this interview online
over text over a timespan of about a week to give time for thoughtful
answers, and it was also the easiest method due to time zone
differences.

I started the interview by asking Shelly how she first learnt about Stan
Twitter. She responded by saying she learnt through external sources
like YouTube video essays on "iconic moments" in Stan Twitter culture.
Then I asked what compelled her to dive deeper into the Stan Twitter
community. Shelly responded by saying, "It's less something I
intentionally dived into, and more something that occurred as I gained
more mutuals from people who were on Stan Twitter, I started seeing more
tweets and content from that side of Twitter." With Stan Twitter having
smaller sub-groups that form around certain genres and artists, I
inquired which genre of music would lead to get Shelly into Stan
Twitter. She says that it was Pop Music, "Even though I love primarily
electronic and experimental music, the only real reason I ended up
somewhat on Stan Twitter is because I followed accounts like Pop Crave
and Pop Base for pop culture news." I followed up and asked specifically
which artist's community got her into Stan Twitter, Shelly responded
with, "It was Björk for sure. She has an army of devoted fans. I vividly
remember the Melanie Martinez -- Portals vs. Björk -- Fossora fan war
between the two sides." This fan war she is talking about is when two
groups of stans pit their favorite artists against each other to see who
will be more successful. The reason for this war happening in this case,
with Melanie Martinez and Björk, is because of the shared aesthetics of
both albums, which Björk stans would claim stolen. Shelly continues, "I
notice lots of artists with more queer fanbases like Kelela and Arca
would get talked about more than someone like Aphex Twin -- his fanbase
is kind of split down the middle in that regard."

In finding out how Stan Twitter may influence members of the group or
outsiders, I asked if Shelly's music taste had expanded because of being
involved in Stan Twitter. She agreed and said, "Yes, very much so. I
think especially when you're on ... Alternative Stan Twitter there's so
many good recommendations on smaller bands or artists I would've had no
idea about otherwise -- but even on mainstream Stan Twitter there's a
lot of good music from larger artists. I think a good example would be
Tinashe's new album 'BB/ANG3L', I probably wouldn't've given it a shot
if it wasn't as acclaimed by stans on release as it was. It's a really
good album too." I then ask who were some significant figures that
might've influenced her, she responded and said, "My favorite stan/music
twitter users are probably [Brook
(\@inholyflux\_),](https://twitter.com/inholyflux_) [Hicc
(\@ijimaia),](https://twitter.com/ijimaia) [Dyl
(\@speckvoices),](https://twitter.com/speckvoices) and some others. The
best users are the ones with funny tweets, good opinions/good taste,
etc." I wanted to know how much real-world impact Stan Twitter has, so I
asked Shelly if she's ever seen in real life change from Stan Twitter's
influence, she responded and said, "There are obviously better, less
subjective examples but if you look at the lyrics to Björk\'s song
Victimhood **(released 2022)** it appears to dwell on how being a victim
in a situation is seen as the higher position, but that may not always
be good for the victim. I don\'t want to go into it much here but
basically one of the interpretations is it could be about **cancel
culture**. Now in 2021, Björk\'s son, Sindri Eldon got semi-cancelled
because he said he was a better singer than his own mother in an
interview from 15 years prior. Obviously, it dispelled quickly - but it
has been interpreted that the song could be about this exact event. But
here\'s the big crazy insane plot twist - One of **my** **mutuals** was
the person who dug up the interview quote in the first place. There is a
chance a random twitter user influenced one of Björk\'s songs. Truly
insane."

Artist's involvement in Stan Twitter varies wide and far across the
different sub-groups of Stan Twitter. I asked Shelly which artists have
the most impact on Stan Twitter, she said, "Some artists/bands I feel
are like universally acclaimed across all subgroups Stan Twitter are Ice
Spice, PinkPantheress, Charli XCX, Taylor Swift, LOONA, New Jeans, Red
Velvet, etc. Anytime they move sends shockwaves through the sphere." I
follow up as she brings up LOONA, Red Velvet, and New Jeans, (who are
Korean Pop groups) why K-pop are most connected with the idea of Stan
Twitter, she responded and said, "K-pop culture is very much intertwined
with stan culture. I don\'t think Stan Twitter would be nearly as
widespread or known as it is if it weren't for K-pop stans." I then ask
if artists have a big impact on Stan Twitter have, she thinks so and
says, "Yes - Stan Twitter essentially revolves around any piece of media
they can consume. The artists create and we consume so we ... try to be
respectful and grateful for their work!" Following up with this, I ask
if artists themselves are involved with Stan Twitter at all, she said,
"Not much. I think most artists see it as a toxic hellscape - lots of
them probably try to avoid it. But I do think sometimes they name search
and accidentally involve themselves."

Stan Twitter gets a bad reputation in outside circles on the internet,
so I asked Shelly what she thought of her experience with interacting
with Stan Twitter and to describe her interacting with Stan Twitter as a
whole, she describes it by saying, "Hell. Like I know I frame it pretty
positively here, but don\'t think for a second that it isn\'t a
hellscape. Stans are willing to **DIE** to support their favorite and
that results in things escalating beyond petty fan wars and into things
that can cause real life harm very quickly. I wouldn\'t say I\'m like
public enemy \#1 to Melanie Martinez fans, but the amount of death
threats and doxx threats I've received from them is concerning."

# **Observation**

I observed Stan Twitter at 6:30 PM on 10/24/2023 by going online and
checking spaces on Twitter that stans could be found. Through going on
accounts like [\@PopBase](https://twitter.com/PopBase), I could find the
consensus of stans around certain artists. The first post I found was a
[post featuring new pictures of rapper Megan Thee
Stallion](https://twitter.com/PopBase/status/1716959705925398774), in
which the stans are both celebrating her and some stans dislike her.

<!-- ![A screenshot of a social media post Description automatically
generated](media/image1.png){width="6.280464785651794in"
height="3.249594269466317in"} -->

These two posts are showing the exact contradiction I was talking about,
in which one is supporting her while the other is saying she's "mid",
which is an insult that has gained popularity through all online spaces.
Throughout the comments you can see people complimenting her for how she
looks, while some are bringing up the [court case with rapper Tory
Lanez](https://www.thecut.com/article/megan-thee-stallion-and-tory-lanezs-assault-case-recap.html),
and blaming her for him being found guilty, and some are pitting her
against another female rapper, Cardi B.

<!-- ![A screenshot of a social media account Description automatically
generated](media/image2.png){width="6.176311242344707in"
height="6.363788276465442in"} -->

This observation shows me how Stan Twitter is still a large diverse
group of people with differing opinions and differing levels of
hostility, which can all be found underneath the comments in this one
post.

# **Soundscape**

This section of the essay has been redacted.

> I didn't like how this part turned out, so I'm redacting it from the original release.

# **Artifacts**

<!-- ![CDN media](media/image3.jpeg){width="6.5in"
height="3.4027777777777777in"} -->

The tweets above are from a Stan Twitter user named Dorothy
([\@thankunext327](https://twitter.com/thankunext327/)) who would have
her phone taken away from her by her mom and would use other household
items and electronics to still communicate on Twitter. People in the
community would start the hashtag \#FreeDorothy from these tweets. This
series of tweets would become iconic as they would become viral and have
brands such as [LG
Electronics](https://twitter.com/LGUS/status/1161388148452200449?lang=en)
and
[Twitter](https://img.buzzfeed.com/buzzfeed-static/static/2019-08/14/22/asset/5e880d64b787/sub-buzz-6325-1565821510-1.png?output-quality=auto&output-format=auto&downsize=640:*)
interacting with the \#FreeDorothy trend. Dorothy's posts also gained
media coverage with [an interview with New York
magazine](http://nymag.com/intelligencer/2019/08/teen-tweets-from-3ds-fridge-after-phone-gets-confiscated.html),
and articles from
[Newsweek](https://www.newsweek.com/grounded-teen-tweets-smart-fridge-thousands-tweet-freedorothy-1454396),
[The
Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2019/aug/13/teen-smart-fridge-twitter-grounded),
and [BuzzFeed
News](https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/stephaniemcneal/dorothy-fridge-tweets)
(the latter two speculating on if it could be a hoax). This showed me
how dedicated Stan Twitter is to still converse with each other.

<!-- ![A screenshot of a social media post Description automatically
generated](media/image4.jpeg){width="3.098611111111111in"
height="3.925in"} -->

This tweet is the origin of a common joke on Stan Twitter. The joke
involves rapper Nicki Minaj, whose real name is Onika Maraj, and alludes
to calling her overweight by saying she eats burgers. The context behind
this reply being a reply to a reply of a Pop Base post showing North
West's art and the initial reply is complimenting North's drawing by
saying "she ate". This would spread to multiple posts throughout Stan
Twitter, multiple of which alluded to fat shaming.

<!-- ![A screenshot of a chat Description automatically
generated](media/image5.png){width="6.5in" height="2.254166666666667in"} -->

This shows how Stan Twitter can be quite brutal to artists and be very
persistent to artists being perfect all the time.

<!-- ![you stan zara｜TikTok
Search](media/image6.jpeg){width="1.7534722222222223in"
height="3.127083333333333in"} -->

[\[View Video\]](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sk3Lse-iYNk)

This is a video of a verbal fight between to stans in real life. One of
which being a stan of pop star Zara Larsson. This is an iconic piece
from Stan Twitter as it can be found very humorous, and Stan Twitter
references this video regularly with the quote, "You stan Zara Larsson!"
The video starts by the man in black repeating what, assumingly, the man
in blue claims that Zara Larsson is on the same level of popularity as
Britney Spears. The man in black claims that to be crazy, and then makes
fun of the man in blue by saying, "Who is this?" The man in blue then
claims that "If you are coming for Zara, then you are coming for all of
Siberia too..." The man in black responds by saying, "Well, we don't
know who Zara is." Then he asks the crowd around if they know who Zara
Larsson is, in which only four people know who she is.

This altercation continues for two minutes where they both mock each
other. The person in blue claims they are allegedly 13 years old, and
that the man in black is fighting with a 13-year-old for no reason.
Which shows that people on Stan Twitter do not care how old someone is,
or who they are before trying to pick a fight with someone, on or off
the internet.

# **Reflection**

I learned about how to conduct an interview online and how to come up
with questions to ask for an interview. I learned through researching
Stan Twitter that archiving things online is very important, as some
tweets or accounts I tried to come across were no longer available to
view. The writing process for a report like this can take longer than
another type of project as waiting on an interviewee and the actual
research process could take some time. The peer review and final process
of this project was smooth and easy to go with.
